Unknown Speaker  1:19
Hi Can you hear me

Unknown Speaker  1:37
I can't hear you could be me. Hang on

Unknown Speaker  1:56
know let me

Speaker 1  2:07
know Hello.

Speaker 2  2:13
I can hear you now that's fine I think it was my yes my speakers weren't working for some reason I think it's just been plugged in upstairs and I unplug it from my computer upstairs it kind of doesn't like it and messes around a little bit.

Speaker 1  2:25
That's right, Mike, how are you? Yeah, good. Thank

Unknown Speaker  2:28
you. Oh by itself.

Speaker 1  2:30
Yes. Not bad at all about all good stuff.

Unknown Speaker  2:33
Have you been up to my show?

Speaker 1  2:36
I went to the caravan at the weekend and I'm gonna go this weekend because the weather's so nice down here. I don't know what it's like.

Speaker 2  2:44
It's yeah, it's raining currently, which isn't ideal. Yeah, so if you've got something's it's sunny down there at least dry?

Speaker 1  2:51
Yes. Well, we did have a lot of rain but now the sun is streaming through the windows. It's nice.

Speaker 2  2:58
Oh, that's good. Yeah, I'm just looking at Alex like the end of the world here at the moment and yesterday was exactly the same. It didn't start raining all day and today's center very, very much feels like autumn in the north. And so the office we're in is altering him and I live about half an hour from altering him a bit further south in Cheshire, and play sport. Northwich. Have you heard of that? No, I haven't. No, no, I just quite nice, you know, it's nice and green and and all that type of stuff, but it's just there when it rains. It's no fun. I've got two dogs as well. So when we take him out, and it's raining, they end up getting all the mud in the house, which isn't ideal. So

Unknown Speaker  3:36
I feel your pain there. Yeah, you've got you've got a dog as well. I'm going to actually

Speaker 1  3:42
I got a rescue one a few weeks ago. Only. Oh, yeah. He's all right. To do have the odd little thing about mainly about the toys, but it seems to happen at the same time every day. So I feel that they're just using up a last bit of energy that they've got left.

Unknown Speaker  4:04
Yeah, that's it. Yeah.

Speaker 1  4:07
Yeah, exactly. It's only been a few weeks and they said it takes three months. So okay. The older one is, you know, trying to assert his authority, so it's fine. I'm sure there were out and I when it first started, I was like, oh, no, but now I just actually let him get on with it and ignore

Speaker 2  4:23
it. Yeah, I will say it in my behalf a bit like my dogs fight just like the dogs. They just need to kind of swap it out with each other. There's always one that's going to be more dominant, who's usually the stronger bigger one, which is the same as mine. But yes, I've got Labradoodles so my mine are quite big. So the bread with standard poodles, so they're quite quite big boys. But yeah, I was I kind of always grown up with Border Collies, when I was when I was younger. I mean, what what breeds have you got?

Speaker 1  4:53
Well, I've got a cockapoo, who's a mix with a working Cocker and a miniature Yeah. Toy miniature stand in it with a miniature poodle and then then my rescue while is a working cocker spaniel. And he's only 15 months so he's a little bit bonkers.

Speaker 2  5:11
Oh bus Yeah, that's nice. So am I gonna say it is one of our friends that she's got a cocker spaniel not working mom but she she's called Annie. She's really really nice but she's she's bummed because as you say she just bombs around. And stuff.

Unknown Speaker  5:26
That's my life now. So yeah, it's nice. Yeah.

Speaker 2  5:29
It's nice. And you take him both to the caravan with you as well. Okay. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. And Tom.

Speaker 1  5:36
Yeah, no, it's okay. It's okay. It's just the whole it's raining again. It's not much fun because I'm actually going to get a count of a cat I saw it today. I should have brought it a cat litter tray and fill it water. So as we come in before we go up the steps to the depth onto the decking because their feet leave horrible marks. Yeah. Yeah. To walk in that tray. Oh, that's good idea. Yeah. So that I can actually wash them. Their feet. Yeah. And then I'll have a tap before I go out or get myself if it's only if it's raining, get myself prepared. And then to minimize the damage. But yeah, every time you go out, you come in with all that mud and everything. Then you get to get them to it then you have to clean like

Speaker 2  6:26
for example, yeah, that's it and usually when they come in when it's wet and horrible, they tend to want to dry themselves on the soap furs. And carpets and all the time. So

Speaker 1  6:37
never done that never done it. Lucky. They're working good. That's exactly what he does. He goes on to say I've put these covers on them now so that when he's rolling around, it's not on the sofa.

Speaker 2  6:48
Yeah, we've got so yeah, we've got massive big blankets because they'll do the same when they come in. That's all it is. And as soon as I take them off the lead, they head straight for the front row and we've got one of those kind of like fluffy rocks and so they're kind of washing themselves and I think the civil fills so what we tend to do now is keep them on the lead, get them in the garden and then just give them a bit of a home is offered at least it's just at least it's more to it and then not not at the same time. So yeah, the the joys of having dogs I mean I love them to pieces but yeah, they are quite messy sometimes so

Speaker 1  7:21
writing in a muddy that is the downside but anyway, most of the time is absolutely fine.

Speaker 2  7:26
Yeah. Oh good stuff. Yeah. Someone from where it was said show me these kind of things. You can get them from Amazon. They're like, like a dressing gown for a dog. So when you when you go out and it's all wet before you get them in the car. Even in the house. There's this kind of like dressing gown that you put on him. And then obviously that stops all the months getting in and that kind of like dries them out as well which are quite cool, but I couldn't see one that'd be picking up from pain and plus, I don't think my dogs would like having something like that on anyways personally, so

Speaker 1  7:55
you have to start. There's those other coats. I've seen them I can't remember what they're called. They're like they fit this like tightly don't they? I forgot Yeah.

Unknown Speaker  8:06
I've seen him as well. Yeah,

Speaker 1  8:08
I can't unless you've done that from when they were very young. Yeah, I can't see how I could get. Well, maybe maybe lucky. But I couldn't get Ted into that. No way. I just wouldn't. Yeah, I don't think it's fair.

Speaker 2  8:21
I don't know. Yeah, we saw I mean, we live in like trash us and there is some kind of like, what's the pretentious people around that we were out once in the park and there was someone two dogs in the abdomen like raincoats. And I said to say he was like look at that. And he had raincoats on it again, like quite tight on the bodies and like these little hooks and I was like that's not fair on the dog because you're gonna get on board and part of being a dog is about you know, jumping into puddles and rolling around and stuff so it's crazy.

Unknown Speaker  8:50
I wouldn't want to put my dog so yeah, just

Speaker 2  8:53
No, no, no, I'm the exact same. But yeah, so how's How's obviously life? I know obviously, you know, you've been kind of working part time for about an hour. How's that? How's that kind of going? Is it going? Okay.

Speaker 1  9:05
Well, my Yeah, my 10 hours is fine. Because because I've never worked in a shop before. So I just had a sign in the window. So I just walked in and that was it. That March time and so I've been doing it ever since it's quite it's actually quite nice. It's

Unknown Speaker  9:21
yeah, I was shocked by shoppers that you work in

Speaker 1  9:24
Clark's shoe shop. Oh, okay. Yeah. So you get all the My favorite part is serving the older people like the because a lot of them are quite lonely. So they come in for a chat and everything. Are you here? And so yeah, so it's nice. It's,

Speaker 2  9:40
it's yeah. It's nice to meet in different people and the kind of office environment that you're up with. With black rock here. Yeah.

Speaker 1  9:47
So it's just it's just nice. It's just Yeah, it's lucky a little job. And it's, I like it. Yeah.

Speaker 2  9:56
Yeah. How long have you no, no, I think obviously, we'll go into it a bit, I think from the some of the kind of longer term. So I've got like this flashlight and so I'm going to start in the dark, but the lights go like this strobe light. And so yeah, I think we go into some of the charts in a bit, the kind of longer term financial planning stuff that we're going to go through, and hopefully gives you that kind of reassurance that you're at stage now where you don't need to work for money. And so it's just a case of you know, you can earn a little bit that's great, but I think probably it means happy tell me otherwise. I'm sure you just kind of just doing this to keep you kind of mind active and just keep you doing something. Yeah, yeah.

Speaker 1  10:42
I did have one question before we start, you know Can I can I if I want to move house, say for instance, yeah. And I needed a bit more money for the purchase. Can I take out some money from my pot just and I've got my I know I've got my lump sum and then when I spoke to Michael, I think he said I could have taken out at something but I didn't want to. Yeah, so I take out 30 But say only so say I've got 50 left of my 25% tax free. If I needed a little bit more say another I don't know 25 or something. Is that possible to do?

Speaker 2  11:27
Yeah, of course it is. Yeah, you can take okay take Yeah, obviously up to the maximum of 25%. From your tax free cash. Obviously we've got the remaining bitter AJ bell which we can we can get up and then obviously you've got your separate

Speaker 1  11:42
so a bit more. So unless the other thing is so I got I had to that figure he gave me 25% was at something. Yeah, that's like now but if my pot increases through investments in everything, yes, I also I needed a bit more than the 50,000 so I needed, I don't know 80,000 How would that how would that work? Would I have to pay tax on the extra 30? Or? Or if my pots grown bigger? Do you see what I mean? How does that all work?

Speaker 2  12:22
Yeah, so effectively, like what you've got at the moment, I'm just gonna get the figures up now and tell you exactly what we're playing with in terms of the tax free cash. And so effectively what you've got at the moment and again, this is kind of a very jargony type pension term. But effectively, you've got two separate parts. You've got one pot, which is uncrystallised. And again, that's a jargon term. And then you've got one pot which is crystallized and now the uncrystallised portion is the bit where you can still get some of the tax free cash from so let's say that figure just gonna get it up on the screen. So we've got the figures here to hand

Unknown Speaker  13:00
uncrystallised

Speaker 2  13:02
Yeah, there's something crystallized this way we can still get some of the tax free the remaining tax free cash from so I'm just going to pull up the numbers just one second. And then we can talk through it in kind of real terms and.

Unknown Speaker  13:28
I should spend a little bit slow.

Unknown Speaker  13:31
No worries.

Speaker 2  13:36
Yeah, well, that's not an impediment. So you'd have like the uncrystallised portion. So let's say for argument's sake, the on crystallized bid is 200,000. For example, that means you'd be able to get 50,000 pounds of tax free cash from that it's 25%. And now obviously, if that grows, so let's say that, you know, that pot grew up to 300,000, for example, and then effectively, it's 25% of that value, if that makes sense. So that in that scenario be 75 rather than 50. And so the bit bits gone into the crystallized but is now the bit where we're taking income from sort of 1000 pounds a month. So we can't take any more tax free cash from there. So if that goes up or down, it doesn't really make a massive difference to the tax free cash but obviously, we want it to increase to increase the sustainability of the funds. And it's the uncrystallised version, the uncrystallised part that obviously we want to increase as well because that effectively means that the tax free cash amount that you're getting is increasing as well.

Speaker 1  14:40
Okay, so and then say, so that say you needed a bit more than say, say, can you take that, but you have to pay tax on it.

Speaker 2  14:51
Yeah, so do you want it so let's say something about okay, now so uncrystallised right now for you from AJ Thau is about 230,000 pounds. So let me just work out reflect that is selected to work. So effectively, I've just rounded it down slightly. So you've probably got about 57,500 of tax free cash. Remaining from AJ Bell, let's just say 5050 58 For rounded up purposes. So let's say you needed 80 And you basically need to get another 22,000 pounds from some from somewhere. So effectively that monies then will then be subject to income tax. But you've still got your black, you know, Blackrock pension as well. And you've not taken you haven't taken your tax free cash from there yet have you know, so I think what was the is the real value of that plot about 100k Is it

Unknown Speaker  15:50
no I wish Oh, so when it's

Unknown Speaker  15:52
slightly less

Speaker 1  15:54
it's 90 now. Just last in the last three months it's lost 1300 There's when I looked it was like oh god if this goes on our will hit 90 within

Speaker 2  16:08
this Yeah. So it's roughly about 919 hours or so. Yeah. So you can still you know, that's, you know, 90,000 there so we can still get 25% tax free from there as well we want it to so effectively you've got an extra you know, based on nine so that's 22,500 let's say. So adding that in with the fifth DA is roughly about 80 Is it? Yeah, but 80 80k or so of tax free cash that you can get at and now one thing we just need to have a look at is obviously you know, you have kind of just semi retired in a sense. So what we need to be comfortable with is that if we did take that amount out, that's obviously quite a big portion of your overall pension savings. So we just need to be comfortable with the fact that we did take that you can still meet your income requirements, if that makes sense. Now that's for a property purchase. If you're thinking about leaving home i

Speaker 1  17:07
Yeah, yeah, it's a possibility. So they weren't case then I probably would. I probably would look to do more hours, you know, if I need. I'm not I'm not against working more hours if I needed the income do you see what I mean? I'm not going to make myself live on 50 pounds a week or something? If that if Oh, no,

Speaker 2  17:31
exactly. Yeah. Yes. I need happy to happy to work a bit more. Yeah, that's it. And I suppose if you're buying a house, that's a bigger value as well. And it might actually be that okay, well, you're going to purchase a house. It's more expensive than the one you're in at the moment. But actually then you might say, Well, okay, we're not going to be this is going to be our house until we get into our 70s for example, and then at that stage, you may be downsize to release some money as well. That's typically what a lot of my clients tend to do. They don't stay in that kind of house forever. So I think we just need to run some, run some numbers run some kind of analysis on our side just to make sure that that's okay. In likelihood it is it might just mean that you do need to do some more hours working potentially. And, and also as well, you've got Ken's pensions as well. Yeah. So

Speaker 1  18:21
but he's, I think we should keep leave him out. Really because he's done is an annuity thing.

Unknown Speaker  18:27
He's done the annuity now.

Speaker 1  18:29
Yeah. So let's, let's just leave him out.

Speaker 2  18:32
Yeah. Okay. Well, it's a bit of a conversation with him, I think, a few months ago. I just given him some kind of guidance on it. So I think he's, he got ahead of them the annuity now.

Speaker 1  18:42
Yeah, he had it in his mind. He wasn't going to change his mind. And so he's just done that that's up to him.

Speaker 2  18:49
Yeah, that's exactly so yeah, we basically just kind of looking at your pots there. We just need to be comfortable with that. If you didn't want to take the monies out. It's not going to have an impact on your ability to, you know, meet your income requirement, because what you don't want to do is we take all the money out, but then you've got to go back to work full time until your 60s, you know what I mean? And so we can just run some numbers on our side, just to make sure that that's, you know, the kind of right thing to do. Okay, perfect, and have you had so obviously thinking about potentially selling the house you're in at the moment, is that going to be something happening fairly quickly. Do you think

Speaker 1  19:30
I've got an estate agent coming around afternoon, so I don't know. I don't know what the markets like because of obviously the interest rate so I don't really know if there's anyone that's going to want to buy I don't know, it's just yesterday, here at the moment. So we'll see. Yeah, yeah, I think it's like a bit because I'm already working 10 hours I wouldn't be able to get a mortgage or die. So that's why I need to.

Speaker 2  19:56
Yeah, I mean, he can it can go off. We can sometimes do it off pension kind of value of your pensions as well. And potentially, it might be worth speaking to one of our mortgage guys just to understand the kind of situation on that. And because it might be that the I think yeah, I think you can some you can sometimes take into account pension income as well. But again, maybe to speak var mortgage guys and see what kind of situation would be around that. And I think obviously for you know, for your kind of kind of stage at the moment, he probably wouldn't if you can do it without him or it's obviously the best case scenario.

Speaker 1  20:35
Yeah, that's yeah, that's that as far as we're thinking, to be honest.

Speaker 2  20:39
Yeah. Perfect. And so yeah, so obviously, you've got that option there. And obviously, you know, you've got the you've got the Willis Towers Watson, as well. Yeah. So we've had a bit of a look at the site a bit before the call just to see what was kind of going on with that. Obviously, the first time I've I've looked at it, but essentially just want to get the numbers up. So So basically, you can you can access this pension in terms of when it's birth, normal retirement date, and in when you're 65. I think you were saying that you thought it was 63. Historically,

Unknown Speaker  21:18
he was 62 historic

Speaker 2  21:20
I was it right. Okay. Yeah. Right. So we might have again, I can't see on our files that they've changed that. And but yeah, the thing is with that is it that's obviously the date where you can access it without any reductions. Exactly. So it might actually make sense. And, again, I'm going to speak to about this to potentially take that sooner, and now probably maybe not straightaway, right now, but that could be the difference between, you know, working 10 hours a week versus not and at the end of day, depending on the reduction if that if this can give you I don't know 4000 pounds a year for example, when you get the tax free cash lump sum as well, then it might potentially make sense to take it now. It just all depends on how much they're going to reduce the benefit by you know, because sometimes they'll say it's free percent a year and that just might, you know, reduce the value that much that it's not worth doing. So we've asked them a bit of a follow up question to see what their kind of adoption rates are. And so once I get those for I can come back to you on that. It might make sense just to keep it there for a few years but again, once I've got the information back from them, then we can cross that bridge when we get there.

Speaker 1  22:34
What is it? What is it currently when I hit 65 Then

Speaker 2  22:40
so yeah, let me just get the numbers again. So when you hit 65 and it's basically saying that it'll provide you with a pension, so an income each year of about 6500 pounds, and a tax free cash lump sum of just over 40 as a maximum and or you can take a full pension option, which is no tax free cash, and about 8000 pounds a year.

Speaker 1  23:10
That's what I saw. That's what I had in mind. I must have seen the eight,

Speaker 2  23:15
the 8000. Yeah. But for most, most of my clients, it's a case of just you know, I always say to them, sometimes it's just better to take the full tax free cash amount because the money's better in your pocket. And and obviously I think I've seen it on my previous poll obviously find that your expenditures higher in the early years of retirement. So you might as well have you know, 40,000 in your bank, spend it you know, holidays doing all the things that you want to do and then actually the 6000 plus your state pension when you when you when you get that as well might be enough to cover your basic bills when you get into your 80s you know, that includes you'd be up to you know, be too old to do all the things that you're doing in your earlier life.

Unknown Speaker  23:57
To travel because then you were very good travel insurance is through the roof.

Speaker 2  24:04
Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's it. Oh

Unknown Speaker  24:11
that's right. It's fine. Oh, no.

Unknown Speaker  24:17
Do you need to take?

Speaker 1  24:18
No, I thought I'd cut you off. Hang on, let me get you back. No, it's fine. It's just my bad I can FaceTime him after I thought I'd cut you off to be fair. All right. So that's age 65. Okay, so then we're gonna go back and see if it was what what it will be if it's age 62 Is that you're gonna

Speaker 2  24:38
Yeah, well, this was smoking workout. And you know what it'd be if you took it now would it be if you took it as 1662 etc. But yeah, my view on stuff like that is if the reduction is not too bad, so you know, you're effectively going to be receiving that pension to one gas if you took it now. You'd have it 10 years earlier than you would have done. And so it can make sense sometimes to take it earlier. Because you don't know how long you're going to be fit and able to do all the nice stuff in life. So the money's better in your pocket rather than getting it when you're 65. So we can take a bit of a look at that for you, and come back to you on the numbers for that as well.

Speaker 1  25:15
Okay, perfect. Well, that would help if, if I do move that would help. Definitely yeah,

Speaker 2  25:21
and so, you know, I don't know how much they would reduce it by but you know, if let's say it was it was St. 6000 a year now, let's say you know, and that's a 65. Let's say that was reduced to 4000 a year and a tax free lump sum of 30 or 25k. And all of a sudden might be worth doing it to be honest. And but again, we can we can have that conversation once we've got that information back from them.

Unknown Speaker  25:45
Okay. All right then. And that's it the charts loaded with the stock stock. Yeah, no, I've

Unknown Speaker  25:52
got I've got the charts up now. I just need to

Speaker 1  25:54
know that I think I'd be able to see much some of this screen is on your phone. No, I'm on my iPad, but it's got it's got

Speaker 2  26:05
Yeah, I should have suddenly just in case seven cents. Just thought you know, the Shanice we

Unknown Speaker  26:28
because it lost money, like my Black Rock one.

Speaker 2  26:33
Yeah, it's not. I mean, it's not been a great year through investments, and especially, you know, the last three years so I think the pension is probably as he started to improve slightly. And but yeah, I think the benefit we had for yourself, but obviously we had quite a little, a little bit of monies in the national savings, income bonds. So we've not had to actually access the dependency or the investment part of the pension such as the pension value is today for you. So in total, it's about 321,000. And obviously, you've had the tax free cash out of there as well. So I think just checking it now. Yeah, it's slightly down. It's down by about point five cents. As we've said, we've had some really bad years in terms of investments, ups and downs. So hopefully, things are starting to settle down and we'll just see it start to tick up again, which which will be good indeed, okay, let me just move this

Unknown Speaker  27:41
shell spins

Unknown Speaker  27:51
right, so can you see that on your

Unknown Speaker  27:53
own? Yeah, I can

Speaker 2  27:55
sort of miss changes we've taken. Yeah, so did you. Did you go through this with my thought? Yes, yes. Yeah. Yeah. So just I'm just gonna run through the figures that quickly so in terms of income and Ken's income now about 33,000. Got your part time work about 4000 a year. Does that reflect Correct? Yes. And then in terms of savings, I think we've had an old figuring out about 4000. Now obviously, you just have the lump sum out the pension. So that will have increased, but I've got that going on in the background, if that makes sense. Yeah. So about that, obviously, property at the moment. We've got main residents about 450k. So that's still broadly Correct. Yeah. Well, I find out a little bit, but yeah, I find that strict shortly. And obviously got the caravan there are about 62,000 purchase that

Speaker 1  28:52
I put, yeah, purchase it for 60. But the site fee was 2000 for this year, but I don't know if actual caravans lose their money or they increase I don't know probably lose their money.

Speaker 2  29:05
Yeah, but it's that kind of it's more of a kind of side of things of having somewhere for you guys to guide us, but it's 60 onto there, and then obviously the pensions. Again, this is pre what we've done before but what I've done in the background, it takes into account be taken out the tax free cash, so just ignore that figure there for the time being the friends could fix this before we take in a tax free cash and we've got the backdrop pension just short nine two, which I think you said was correct. And Michael had included Ken's pensions in here as well. But obviously he's annuitize now so it might just be worth me. Deleting these out, yes. Of ops planning and.

Unknown Speaker  29:55
Then we've got the updates a bit. Okay, so spotlights eight

Speaker 2  30:07
and then the Tuesday pensions though when you get them it should be 10,600 each. And then in terms of the loans again, that's pre I think you've paid that off. Now and you got 10,000 Yeah, that's all that's all been paid off. And then expenditure is kind of expenditure that we went with that you sent me on the spreadsheet which was great and so effectively

Speaker 2  30:37
so effectively I'm sure you went through this with with Michael is just once read better like that. Yeah, it's just the things I've changed somewhat here let me just because I think it's I've taken up pen cans pensions, and it's some ways it's taken better not get so get rid of the red

Speaker 2  31:46
Hi there everyone. Some settings my cord had him beforehand. Right. So effectively what we're looking at here basically I'm sure you've gone through with with Michael before is is basically looking at money in versus money out. So this is kind of a very broad kind of overview of your cash flow situation. And basically each one of these bars here represents a year of your lives. So we can see, you know, we basically split expenditure into three phases. We've got savings phase, so that's kind of where and again this is just because Ken's still working there but this is effectively where you know accumulating monies into pensions and I know Ken's and you were ties in you're probably probably not got a pension now with with with Clark's but it just kind of splits it up into into into three different phases. And we've got the spending phase, which is kind of the most important that's where, you know, you've both retired, you've got the time freedom to do so. You might spend more time at the caravan it might be holidays, all that type of stuff. So typically your spending is higher in these years. And then as we discussed before, you know when you get into your 80s, you then start to slow down and you're probably not going to be spending as much money as you were in the you know, in the earlier years here. Just to give you an outline of the colors and the orange is your pension. And we can see there's a bit of a spike here where we took the tax free cash this year. And the blue is kind of just pens income from his job. And I think for the purposes of this, we assume that Ken carries on working until he's 61. I don't know if that again, that if that's correct or not. He was just kind of what was in the cash flow already.

Speaker 1  33:36
I think you'd probably keep working a bit longer but we'll just leave it like this at the moment.

Speaker 2  33:42
Yeah, yeah. And then we've got your the small blue there which is in this as well as is your income that you get in at the moment from from classes. I've just got that going on for three years but again, that can be completely flexible as well. But the good news is there's no red as that obviously was a little bit there before. And so this basically shows that obviously if you carry on kind of as you are right now so working at Clark's can carries on working then effectively you know, you can continue to meet your expenditure requirements until the rest of your life. And the green here is your pension with Willis Towers Watson there. So that effectively is kicking in at 65. And that's good to just assume that you take it at that age and and you know, we don't take any earlier. The blue here is your state pensions but when they kick in, and actually, we can we can see here at this stage that once you're in receipt of your state pensions and your pension, then you only really need to draw about 9000 pounds from your AJ Bell pension or your blackbrook. So therefore, in these years while we're waiting for some of this stuff to kick in, what it's saying is you're gonna have to take a little bit more money from your AJ Bell pension or Blackrock pension. Now what does this means in terms of kind of assets? Because obviously we're just looking at cash flow there is just take the non liquid off so just taking on mum liquid on terms of property as of today and this was before obviously we took the tax free cash out you can have liquid assets around the forums and 50,000 pounds mark and as we can see you know, once you start to draw down from the pension in terms of income, that this starts to drop off, but as you get to, you know, you get a sample when you get to the point of receiving your state pensions, you're not drawing as much from your kind of AJ bell or blackbrook pension. We can actually see that you're getting to age 100, about 90,000 pounds a year 90,000 pounds left. So that's, you know, this is really, really positive apart from the fact that you get into age 190 Because what I want to challenge you to do is spend that and I think when we spoke initially I think you were saying that you want to hopefully spend spend all of your money.

Speaker 1  36:06
Yes. So I might leave a little bit to my niece and nephews I don't know see how generous I'm feeling at 90

Speaker 2  36:14
Yeah, that's it and what we've got in the background so I was still a property and I know you're getting that valued, you know very shortly. But by the estate agent, we've sold the property here. So as you know, it's talking to you before and if you got to like you 70s And you still you know, maybe mid 60s, you want to downsize, release some monies you can do that as well. And that just means that you've been able to spend more in these years. And but the assumption is this is that you never need to liquidate from your your main residence, which is good. And you actually get into age 100 with the main residence life to the property and obviously about 90 grand left in the pension. And so at that stage, you might just say, right, okay, well, we've, you know, either spent it all or there's maybe I don't know, 100 grand with Kinesis. Or you might just take the view off. We want to spend it all ourselves. Yeah, maybe. So, yeah, so I think this is really really positive and obviously what we've not included on this as well is Ken's a new wetsuit that he's got. So you know if we included that on there, I don't know what he's what he's kind of cashed in for in terms of the income, but all of a sudden, if that's a half decent figure, and you know, I'm guessing there's all the all the expenditure providers that joint expenditure Yes, yeah, yes. Yeah. So all of a sudden and you know, we had the we just started a new Etsy and for for Canada as well, I just put a figure in here.

Speaker 1  37:40
Think about eight was it eight, something like that?

Speaker 2  37:43
8000 was okay, we can add that in and then obviously that just makes everything more you no more positive as well so just immediately knew it's

Unknown Speaker  37:58
sorry, in pain, and it was about 8000 a year escalation. You don't have to do you know if you said it was inflation linked or not.

Speaker 2  38:12
Now we'll leave it as that anyway. It's not it doesn't make a massive difference, but all of a sudden, you had the 10s annuity in there as well. And then actually, when you get to your 80s all of your expenditure is going to be covered by guaranteed sources of income. So your pension 10s annuity, and your two state pensions. And now we look at the assets chart just for making that slight tweak there. And we can actually see that you now get into age 100 for that 360 grand left in the pension. Which kind of proves that, you know, the taking the tax rate cash from your pensions in terms of the property purchase is probably a affordable, sensible thing to do. But even if we did that, it shows that you can probably spend some more money in these years as well. So the expenditure that provided we can probably add, you know, maybe five grand a year or something like that to go or maybe extra holidays or whatever it may be. Great. So yeah, hopefully this is kind of positive news for

Unknown Speaker  39:17
us. Yeah, of course. Yeah.

Speaker 2  39:19
Which is good. And I think it shows that you've got to you've reached financial independence. And you know, so you were saying before about what do you need to go back and do some extra hours at work? I think the answer to this is probably no. And, and obviously you can do extra hours if you wanted to hear but if you if you wanted to keep yourself a bit more your mind a bit more active or

Unknown Speaker  39:43
sorry. A bit more occupied.

Speaker 2  39:46
Yeah, exactly. Yeah, exactly. Or you could do something completely different. So you get any you got sick of working at class, you could do some charity work. I know you've got two dogs there so they keep you busy. Yeah, the dogs keep you busy. Yeah, so you got you got them. Now I've had some clients who you know sometimes I've really, really liked the dogs and stuff and they've gone to do some work in dogs homes and dogs trust and stuff like that. So you know, there's that avenue to go down as well. So I think the key takeaway is, you don't need to work for money. And I think you've obviously gone through a stage of life of white working life as accumulating all your money into the pensions, but I think now it's a point of and there's that psychological switch in your brain of okay, this money is there for spending, we need to spend it and that's a bit of a switch in people's brains. They kind of got all this money there and I know 10 for it because it is this amount. And but I think it shows with what we've done there as well, even though getting a good investment return is is what we're kind of aiming for. Actually, we use some fairly cautious assumptions in there and you're still going to be absolutely fine. So my key is don't wait around for anything. Just you know the stuff that you want to do, go and do it. If you need money up the pensions, give me a shout and we can always you know, talk softly cash up, get your money to do things that you want. To do.

Speaker 1  41:05
Oh, that's great. That's lovely. Yeah. Thank you very much.

Speaker 2  41:11
Yeah, no problem. I say if you've got any questions, give me a shout. I mean, keep me updated on the house sale stuff, and we'll probably just need an hour and I mean, probably about a month to notice to be able to get the money out. It won't take me long to draft the recommendation report but obviously ha but last time I messed around a little bit. That's about two weeks I'd probably say the more notice you can give us the better and then we can get some money out of there if need be. And then obviously I can help you with getting some money out the back right one as well. If you wanted to do that.

Speaker 1  41:46
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I mean, these things take time. So

Speaker 2  41:50
Oh, yeah, exactly. Yeah, they all take a bit of time, but yes, so the more updates you can keep us the better and just give us plenty of notice. If you do need some some monies out. I suppose one question is obviously you've got you know, some income coming in from carts about the 4000. We've set up 1000 pounds a month for you. Is that enough for us? Would you need it was you kind of what was your basis around the 1000 pounds?

Speaker 1  42:15
Yeah, just Yeah. I suppose it was about in my mind, it was about paying tax. Yeah. And also, I was, as you say, it's the brain switch, isn't it? So you're used to trying to put the money in and then to take it out? Is I just thought I'd see how I got on with that with the fifth with the 50. And also there'll be it'll be although this year, I won't probably I won't actually pay any tax on it because it my first payment is October and then by March, I won't have had a full tax allowance. But I think Michael said that they do when they pay it to you they do tax you on it initially. And then you have to claim it back in April.

Speaker 2  43:06
Yeah, unfortunately, there's no way around that they'll emergency tax that first payment so it's sent for files in it might be more like 500 pounds. And so then you can either claim it back from HMRC directly if you needed it sooner or they'll just pay it back at the end of the tax year effectively. And yeah, just because they get a bit mixed up on it or so they effectively think that you're taking it along sides employment income. So by the next tax year, your tax code will have all been sorted out and then from next capture, there should be never touch the pay on it effectively.

Speaker 1  43:41
So I don't know whether 1000 pound will be enough. But

Speaker 2  43:47
yeah, I just didn't I just don't want to do even though you said about tax. I just don't want you to believe in yourself short. Did that make sense? And

Speaker 1  43:55
so my lump sum that I've put away yeah. So I have got that so I mean, I just it just in my mind it was about the tax. And I know that I'm gonna have to I can't probably survive when I sat on that every I'm not going to be able to survive on that going forward. So I've just got to get my head around the fact that I am going to have to pay a bit of text back.

Speaker 2  44:18
Yeah, and the thing is, you're obviously when you work to blow up rock what would you what was your earnings roughly when you worked at BlackRock?

Speaker 1  44:27
Well when I was when I was before I got made redundant the first time it was about with my bonus I got quite good bonuses. It worked out to about 80,000

Speaker 2  44:37
All right, okay. So you basically so you obviously higher rate of tax there so anything that was going into the pension that you were putting in you were saving 40% tax, and obviously blackbrook They were putting a good chunk in as well, which obviously you know, it's kind of free money in a sense. So I would give it in the way for ksa 40% tax on the way into the pension. You've obviously got your 25% lump sum tax free, the 12,000 and a bit we can take out tax free as well. And then anything else that's 20%. So you can effectively see it as you've saved 40% on the way in and on the way out. It's going to be less than 20% tax. And so it's just again, it's that shift and that kind of mindset to get comfortable with that and know what Yeah, I wouldn't I wouldn't, I don't want it to put you off. You know, I know you've got some plus we're getting a bit out but what I don't want you to do is kind of avoid doing stuff because you're going to pay tax on the money. So if that makes sense.

Speaker 1  45:35
As you say I've got to get my head now that and then if that's my my pension is my only income. I won't have any choice anyway, I have to take out more. It's just that it was the first year and I just thought I'd see how it goes. But

Unknown Speaker  45:49
yeah, yeah.

Speaker 1  45:52
Yeah, and this is when you signed up to your first year say, is that set in stone? So for my first year, I've asked for 1000 pounds a month. Is that set in stone for the first year?

Speaker 2  46:03
No, we can change we can change it now. We could change it and we probably missed the cutoff now but if we wanted to change it, we could change it to November's payment if we wanted to.

Speaker 1  46:11
Oh no I just wait and see how it goes. But it's completely

Speaker 2  46:15
flexible. Yeah. So it's not a case of 1000 for the year, and so on and that's maybe let's maybe give it three months and maybe after the Christmas we can maybe just catch up again. See how you're getting on and you know, you're spending more than you thought for 24 hours, which isn't a bad thing. We can then maybe think about increasing up to you know, whenever we need to at the time. Okay.

Speaker 1  46:41
Yeah, that's a good, that's a good thing to hear. Yeah, because

Speaker 2  46:45
I'm assuming we did, though, in terms of the charts, obviously. That takes into account tax as well. So we saw there that you know, even if you're paying a little bit tax, you still absolutely fine and you still got the ability to spend more money than you think. And I think yeah, just I just kind of encourage you to do so on the clients. If there's things that you want to do, go and do them. You know, maybe sit down with Canada think about it and maybe just start planning out you know, the next year or so and get some things in the diary like holidays and trips to the caravan and all that type of stuff.

Speaker 1  47:17
Yeah. As you say it's a brain switch of doing it. Yeah,

Speaker 2  47:23
yeah. And for some clients might do when they retire because there is that mental switch is we'll just say and probably someone's what we've worked on with you now is just okay, we're going to give you some regular income so that you get used to it coming in. And then over time, we can always increase that up or whatever but some some clients are there is if a no they need the money we'll just say right, we're not messing around let's just get this money coming out the pension so used to it coming in, because you spent you spent the whole working life building this pot up and now you've got the time freedom to enjoy yourself. So you need to start spending this money without having to do with a nine to five Monday to Friday

Speaker 1  47:56
without feeling like guilty that you're not you're spending your pot that you've been working life you've been saving into those nuts.

Speaker 2  48:06
Yeah, yeah, psychological aspects. But okay, let's maybe catch up then in a few months time maybe after Christmas. I'll see how you get in. We'll see are you getting on and then we can always increase it leave it as it is and baby just keep doing that every every so often and so we feel that we've got that amount right space. Okay, cool. Yeah, and I think the good thing is as well but cash flow I don't think quite mentioned is 10 could probably retire as well. I mean, only Sony's quite set at wanting to go you know, carry on for a few years, but he could probably retire today, I would say as well, which is the big thing. So you know, maybe having a conversation with Ken and saying that we have got enough money here to do all this. So yeah, maybe having that conversation with him. And obviously, I know we don't do this. I know historically we've not done this jointly but I'm happy for Ken to sit on a call like this as well and going through some of the cash flow and the numbers so that he can see jointly with Michael Okay, did you Yeah,

Speaker 1  49:03
he does know how it kind of works. Yeah, yeah, but just

Speaker 2  49:07
very exciting. What Why are you still working and try and get him to retire as well?

Speaker 1  49:12
He likes working worsen. Yes. All right. Thank you very much. And yeah, let's catch up after Christmas. I know that you get busy don't you in March for the tax year was.

Speaker 2  49:28
Yeah, a little bit more of the Yeah, we do get quite busy around that time. So maybe let's say February, something like that. Then Then we've got Christmas out the way January's done, which is a depressing month for everybody. Then we can have a chat in February. Okay. All right. That's great. Well, yeah, I'm always if you need me, so feel free to reach out if you've got any questions on anything. All right. Thanks very much. Cheers. I'll see you later. Bye. Bye.

Transcribed by https://otter.ai
